To be
or not to be.
That is the question.
Whether it is nobler in mind to suffer
the slings and arrows of outrageous
fortune. Do you keep your head down and
just take it? Or to take arms against a
sea of troubles and by opposing end
them. It's a far more confronting and
radical speech than we've been taught.
Riz Ahmed, actor, writer, Oscar winner
on his latest film Hamlet. We're all
grieving this illusion that the world
was had some semblance of fairness and
justice.
>> of what's happening in the news? Because
of what's happening in the world. Yeah,
absolutely. It does feel like the old
order is falling apart, doesn't it? You
know, we lived in a world where you just
didn't do certain things. You didn't say
certain things. Where people in public
office would conduct themselves in a
certain way. Where there was
accountability. These things are
crumbling.
From Bloomberg Weekend, this is the
Michelle Hussain show.
Shakespeare's Hamlet is more than 400
years old. A play that contains some of
the most famous lines in the English
language. How does it speak to us today?
A new and radical take has come from the
British actor, writer, and producer Riz
Ahmed.
Huh.
Us.
Conscience does make cowards of us all.
Who in recent years has combined the
more arthouse project with the big
budget world. He was Oscar nominated for
Sound of Metal, a film I loved. He was
in the Star Wars prequel Rogue One. He
has a new film coming up with Tom
Cruise. And aside from Hamlet, his other
current project is a series on Prime
Video called Bait, a black comedy about
an actor on the cusp of a life-changing
role. Shah, by you're going to be the
next James Bond.
What? But Riz Ahmed has long been
interesting beyond his on-screen work.
It's nearly 10 years since he made a
speech in the UK Parliament about race.
He's written about his experience as a
Muslim with British intelligence, US
immigration, and airport security. In
this conversation, we talk about
creativity and politics, about family
life because he recently became a
father.
And first, about being Hamlet, a part he
dreamt of since his teens, and a plot he
believes is evergreen.
I think the thing with a timeless story
like Hamlet is that it always feels
timely. It never goes out of fashion,
right? It's about family and love and
loyalty and loss and how do you do the
right thing? These These are timeless
themes. They'll They will always feel
relevant. But I can't help but feel that
it's actually more relevant now than
ever. I think there's actually a reason
why it's bubbling up in the collective
kind of unconscious actually at the
moment. You know, you've had our film
Hamlet, you've had Hamnet out as well,
um and you've also had Grand Theft
Hamlet. Don't know if you're aware of
this. Grand Theft Auto meets Hamlet.
It's It's a play staged in the in the
video game world. I I think the reason
why we're turning to this story right
now is because it's a
Hamlet is a character I think is going
through a version of
what we all are
um at the moment. He's grieving the
illusion that the world was a fair
place.
You know, that's really what's
happening. He's grieving the loss of his
father, yes, but his father represented
a certain way of doing things. Perhaps
flawed, but
you know, not as shamelessly unjust, not
as brazenly
um kind of corrupt as the regime that
his kind of uncle sets up. And so, I
think we're we're all grieving this this
illusion that the world was had some
semblance of fairness and justice.
>> of what's happening in the news? Because
of what's happening in the in the in the
world. Yeah, absolutely. It does feel
like the old order is falling apart,
doesn't it? You know, we lived uh in in
a world where
um you know, so you just didn't do
certain things. You didn't say certain
things where people in public office
would conduct themselves in a certain
way, where there was accountability.
Um
you know, we we came off the back of the
Second World War setting up
international systems, multilateral
organizations. These things are
crumbling. And so, yes, that's bring it
to the micro specificity of the news
cycle, but to bring it back to the
emotional level, which is where I hope
my my work kind of operates, I think
we're all feeling a sense of shock and
grief and loss,
you know, that the world was a fair
place. And actually, to to take the kind
of parallels further, just like Hamlet,
we're actually being gaslit about it.
We're actually being told that there's
nothing wrong, this is business as
usual, and how things should be. A new
normal. Yeah, we're feeling powerless in
the face of it. And actually,
ultimately, Hamlet really realizes, like
I think many of us are, that we're
complicit in it. We're complicit in the
new regime of injustice. We're feeding
the fire and the algorithmic fuel, you
know, of outrage um that seems to be
kind of characterizing our politics.
>> Well, in Hamlet's case, he's driven mad
by the wrongs that he sees around him.
It
understandably absolutely consumes him.
I always think that one of the central
questions of the play is, is it the
world that's
gone crazy or is it me?
You know, uh that's certainly how I
think we're we're we're we're all
feeling at the moment. You know, it
feels like we're living in a very
unstable time, just as Hamlet was. And
actually, I think there's some solace we
can gain from turning to these in you
know, canonical stories at this time,
realizing actually we've been through
this before. You know, we're not the
first people to feel this way. There's
an element of hope, I think, um
and we we can feel a little less alone
in that grief.
>> You've been thinking about doing Hamlet
for a long time, I think. Yeah,
absolutely.
>> How long? Um I first had the idea very
precociously when I was about 17. And
the reason is, um, I I got a government
assisted place to a private school where
I felt very much like an outsider for
many different reasons. And I had an
inspirational English teacher called Mr.
Roseblade. He took me under his wing. He
was a a white, um, middle-aged Jewish
guy from Wolverhampton. Uh, seemingly
nothing in common, but he he spoke
fluent Punjabi.
And he just had this kind of connection,
um, to to me and other boys who felt
like outsiders in that institution.
>> Cuz there were very few brown kids in
this in this school.
>> I think it was a class thing. I think it
was also just something about my my
personality. I think in retrospect I
realized I was probably very ADD and I
just I had to kind of push back and
didn't do very well with rules, so I was
always getting into trouble. And he gave
me this play and said, "I know you think
Shakespeare is everything you're on the
outside of. You know, this is stuffy
establishment kind of canon. But
actually this character in the heart of
this play, the most famous revered play,
um, in in British culture, he feels like
an outsider as well. So much so he
doesn't even want to be in this play.
He, you know, he's, uh, stuck in a
revenge tragedy and he's not sure he
wants to take revenge. And so he gave me
this play and in it I found myself like
so many people have before and since.
And more than just the kind of emotional
similarities to how I was feeling as a
teenager,
I found something I really didn't
expect, which is I found massive
parallels with my own lived experience
as a British Asian.
And it was really a mind-blowing to me
to see that, "Hang on a minute, this is
a story where it's about who you can and
can't marry.
It's about everyone's squabbling over
the family business. It's where ghosts
and spirituality are part of your lived
experience.
And there's even a a kind of tradition
in Jewish culture and in South Asian
culture that is is a central part of the
story, which is
if your brother dies and you yourself
are unmarried
you may end up marrying your
sister-in-law. It's a way of protecting
the orphans.
And and so all of these elements made me
think, "Wow, actually this
this story's for me and I'm not on the
outside of this." It really reframed for
me
who can be in the stories at the heart
of our culture
and who those stories belong to. And and
so I back then as a 17-year-old I I had
this kind of
dream of trying to democratize this play
and and and you know, kind of crack it
open for a wider audience. But in some
ways you've made parts of it more
elusive to some audiences in that there
are parts of the dialogue and entire
speeches which at times are in Hindi. So
sometimes the the English speaker is
struggling to access some bits of it. So
I think you've both democratized it and
you've in setting it within a British
Asian family you've you've introduced a
different dimension. I wouldn't say
obscures it for me personally. The
feedback I've had is that non-Hindi
speakers absolutely adore the speeches
that we've kind of translated into Hindi
because I think what people connect to
more than their similarity to their
experience is specificity.
You know, if something feels authentic,
if something feels specific enough
that's what pulls people in and then
they're able to find themselves in it.
So yes, basing it in a Hindi family on
the outskirts of northwest London, a
property empire rather than a Danish
kingdom, it makes it more specific.
Actually what I find is it actually
makes it more real. Makes it feel
renders it more vivid and more grounded
and
you know, the most gratifying thing for
me has been hearing people say, "You
know, I I always felt Shakespeare wasn't
for me and I've never really understood
it. This is the first time I've
understood it. This is the first time
it's felt real and tangible." And I
think specificity does that. Rather than
distancing audiences
um through points of difference it pulls
them in through kind of authenticity.
And by being Hamlet you get to say some
of the most famous lines in the English
language, the to be or not to be speech.
Yeah, it's it's really fascinating,
isn't it? Because even people who don't
know about or care for Shakespeare, they
know those words. They're probably the
most famous words ever written in any
language ever. You know, the play itself
has been performed continuously since it
was written
somewhere around the world.
>> Yeah. It's seen on stage in the Hamlet
film. Exactly. It's it's never stopped
being performed. And so, but what I
found really fascinating is when I
started talking to my drama school
teacher, Rob Clare, about this, is that
I think that speech is is massively
misunderstood.
You know, we we think that to be or not
to be, that is the question, is a speech
about suicide.
Broadly speaking, right? If Hamlet takes
the stage, he's pointing a dagger at
himself or whatever it may be.
But actually, if anything, he should be
pointing the dagger outwards. It's a far
more confronting and radical speech than
we've been taught.
And then it then it is traditionally
performed, it's actually a speech about
resistance.
It's a It's a speech about do I have the
courage to fight back against injustice
and oppression, even if it means I might
lose everything? I might lose my life.
Hence the slings and arrows of
outrageous fortune and
the call to arms in a sea of troubles.
>> That's exactly the active verb there is
take arms.
You know, to be or not to be, that is
the question, saying out of context.
Whether 'tis nobler in mind to suffer
the slings and arrows of outrageous
fortune, do you keep your head down and
just take it, or to take arms
against a sea of troubles, and by
opposing
end them. Now, what happens when you
oppose a sea? It drowns you. It's It's a
way of saying is I can fight back, but I
know this will only end one way, with my
death. I mean, that's a That's a really
radical question. That's a And so, the
way that we tried to film it and stage
it was I hope is radical as as as those
words kind of invite us to imagine.
To be
or not to be.
That is the question.
Whether it's nobler in the mind to
suffer
the slings and arrows of outrageous
fortune, or to take arms against a sea
of troubles.
And by opposing end them. To die, to
sleep.
No more.
You know, Hamlet is driving down a
motorway at 100 miles an hour in a BMW
towards a
a massive lorry.
If the speech itself is a game of
chicken when he is daring himself to go
to the edge,
then that's how we wanted to film it.
And and I hope that it invites people to
reimagine and revive the kind of radical
DNA of this play.
>> Yeah, it's a very striking way to do it
because as I started watching the film,
in the back of my mind somewhere was how
how they're going to do the to be or not
to be speech cuz you know it's it's
coming and the way you did it really
took my breath away. But if you've been
thinking about the play and Hamlet for
such a long time, had you been
had you had you been thinking about the
way that you might play this? You know,
was it was it were these words that you
said in front of the bathroom mirror or
anywhere else?
>> you know, it's so funny. It's like what
is it saying? It's like
we make plans and God laughs, right? And
and that's actually one of my favorite
lines in in
Hamlet is
there's a divinity that shapes our our
ends, rough-hew them how we will, right?
You can make all the plans you want and
I had all these thoughts and ideas, you
know, going back for all these years
about how I might want to do this. When
it got down to it, particularly when
you're making a film like when you're
undertaking any kind of big
collaborative project, it it has its own
momentum. It has its own parameters, its
own limitations.
Part of
you know, the pace and the energy with
which we perform to be or not to be was
dictated by the fact that we could only
find a certain stretch of motorway in
which to film it.
You know, runtime historically if you
watch that speech in most films,
sometimes it's done in voice over so
it's a bit quicker, but it's about 5
minutes.
It was like, "Okay, you got 2 minutes
and 40 seconds to be to do to be or not
to be."
So, that's out of my hands, right? It's
out of my hands and actually what I find
as an actor is the fewer decisions I am
making,
the more that I am responding to things
out of my control, the better cuz it's
authentic. I'm not acting, I'm reacting.
And I think that the best things happen
in life when there's an element of
surrender, you know, when we're forced
to kind of resort to instinct rather
than planning. I'll I'll give you
another example.
Um you know, I've been hoping to play
this role for the decades, you know,
probably 25 years if we go back to when
I was 17.
And uh
what I didn't account for is that I
would
I would have just had a a baby. My wife
would have just given birth. We had a
newborn.
I was not sleeping at all.
So, after years of kind of build-up and
anticipation, I'm going to perform these
timeless speeches on 1 2 3 hours of
sleep. I shouldn't complain about it cuz
every time I do my wife tells me to you
know, "Watch it, you know, it was much
worse for her."
But um Aneel, the director,
his kid was going through a sleep
regression, too. So, we had this kind of
ongoing joke. We'd turn up and go, "All
right, how long last night?" "2 hours."
"1 hour." "I win."
And actually that brought a
kind of frazzled vulnerability
and
a kind of an unraveling that was
I wasn't acting. You know, you could see
that on the screen. Yeah, and a lot of
it is filmed in real close-up, so the
camera doesn't miss any of that.
Obviously, you're acting, but it tells
us what's going on behind the scenes.
So, the actual motorway driving scene,
how many how many takes?
You're also doing that so you're driving
on not much sleep.
>> We didn't get a ton of takes on that
because it was about finding a very
particular stretch of motorway
that we could control and all this kind
of stuff with the stunt vehicles etc. It
was
You know, I think there's something
interesting about that. I remember when
I was doing Sound of Metal as well.
We only got a couple of takes of that
big drumming sequence at the start of
the film. I love that film by the way.
You were Oscar nominated for it. It's
about the drama who loses his hearing.
>> Right. Yes.
Well, I'm glad you connected with it. I
think there can be something magical
about embracing the imperfections of
like spontaneity. I'm trying to do it
more and more. Trying to surrender to
the authenticity of the moment instead
of trying to
endlessly revise things with this kind
of perfectionist obsession I used to
have.
I don't know, maybe something about
fatherhood teaches you that surrender,
but I remember when we did Sound of
Metal,
you know, I was rehearsing for that for
8 months. I didn't know how to play the
drums and we ended up having two takes
of that.
You just got to embrace it. I think it
just kind of like
pushes you to focus. So, yeah, as much
as I might kind of kind of moan about
those limitations, I think often in the
end I'm grateful for them. Your other
new project at the moment the TV series
Bait, which is on Amazon Prime. I mean,
interestingly cuz we've been talking
about Hamlet, a great iconic character.
That also has a great iconic character
as part of the storyline.
Chiwetel, are you going to be the next
James Bond?
What?
Huh? Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. It
might be Chiwetel. It might be Chiwetel.
It might be Chiwetel. I have a little
Yeah, I guess I'm interested in in
stepping into the canon, stepping into
these archetypes and subverting them and
complicating them.
And and if anything just adding
vulnerability to them. Oh, it's an it's
JUST AN AUDITION.
SUPER JAMES BOND MIDDLE SHOT YOU.
LISTEN, it's an audition. It's a photo
from today's audition. That's all it is.
Oh, my god. James Bond is white. Often
we these characters become kind of
archetypes and suits of armor, you know,
that we wear.
>> James Bond in the case of Bait.
>> or Hamlet or whatever it is and and
actually what I'm really interested in
is like how can we humanize them? Do
they know about a height?
You know what
They're going to give you special shoes
like James Bond's are
big, aren't they?
You know, it's it's interesting when we
first had the idea of kind of tying
together all the personal themes of of
Bayt and then it is a very personal
show.
We had the idea of putting that all into
the vessel of James Bond, everyone said
there's no way you're going to be able
to do it.
But it was to Barbara Broccoli's credit,
we sat down with her, showed her
scripts, explained to her and I think
she saw as well actually the show's not
about James Bond, it's about
I think a feeling that a lot of us can
relate to that
life sometimes feels like one big
audition.
You know, and so we wanted to tell a
story about someone auditioning to be
James Bond because we all I think now
with social media and LinkedIn and Zoom
calls always performing a more
put-together version of ourselves. And
the actor's on the brink of something
incredible. So huge role is within his
grasp and then his life starts to fall
apart. But the Barbara Broccoli, is that
because you needed her permission or at
least you needed her not to sue you?
Yeah, we needed her permission. She's
never done this before. It's not it's
not been done, you know, she's never
given up the Bond IP for someone to kind
of make a
surreal satirical TV comedy, you know,
within that playground. And I think it's
to her credit and also credit of our
incredible writers room, you know, we
had
people in that room from from The Bear
and Yellowjackets and Industry and
people who would work with the comedian
Hasan Minhaj and my wife who's a
novelist and She was in the writers
room? Yeah, brains much bigger than mine
and we we all just kind of tried to just
find a way of you trying to just trying
to thread this this tonal
uh
kind of fusion we were going for, you
know. Yeah, and the actor's also, you
know, part of a British Asian family so
your you know, your own heritage is
reflected in it. I you said it was
personal before and I wondered how
personal that the you know the actor
looking for the big breakthrough role,
like how much of yourself did you bring
to it?
>> I mean so much. And again not so much
because I wanted it to be a therapy
session or to feel solipsistic in that
way. I just wanted to kind of be as
authentic as possible because I think
that's how people end up relating to
things ironically.
I mean where to begin? I mean
in episode one my character has a panic
attack
in the music venue in London, the
Kentish Town Forum.
I had a a panic attack in that exact
venue. I burst out of those side fire
escape doors into that same alleyway
where we recreated that scene. My
character gets jumped and attacked as a
uh
you know preteen
uh on a
kind of railway overpass in a park in
Wembley. That exact thing happened to me
or a version of it
in that on that staircase in that park
in Wembley, you know. My my character is
um approached by the security services,
you know, after becoming a bit more
well-known as an actor and they say,
"Hey, do you want to come and work with
us?" Literally that's happened to me
several times, you know, since I've
started my career. I I you know it goes
on and on and on and and I just kind of
honestly it was quite scary. It felt
quite vulnerable to to kind of go there
and share that but I thought if I'm
going to tell a story about a character
who who needs to learn how to take the
mask off, then I've got to do that
myself, you know, there's no there's no
cheating here. I have to
take the mask off myself and kind of put
it all out there. There's a moment in it
that
stuck in my mind where your character
turns around to his family and others in
his immediate circle
and says
"You don't understand me" essentially.
"I'm trying to make a difference. I'm
trying to change the world so that
people don't look at you and think
you're worthless."
It's
I wondered if that was personal to you,
the sense that you
needed to break out and do something
different. Because at the time you went
into the industry, there there weren't
very many actors of your background and
heritage. And if they were, they were
playing kind of like classic
stereotypical post-9/11 roles. Yeah. You
know what I love about that speech is
that if something feels so kind of
when we were working on that, it needed
to feel both like
uh
like there was a nobility in it and also
like a deeply offensive condescension in
it and that this character was motivated
by both those things. And honestly, I
think as an artist, there is often that
combination, right? You need to have an
ego to think you have something to say
and something to offer.
But if that ego gets too big, then
rather than offering and giving
something, what you want is you want to
get something. You want to get that
round of applause. You want to get that
praise. You want to get those accolades.
And so, our character Shah is is walking
that fine line, but certainly I think
I've been through periods of my life
where what I think I'm seeking is other
people's approval.
You know, whether for myself or Yeah,
whether for myself or whether for my
community. And actually, I'd go as far
as say that that the pendulum keeps
swinging back and forth, you know.
Depending on how much sleep you've had
and how vulnerable you feel, you we need
that that kind of hug Mhm. um from the
culture. One day and the next day you
feel actually you can give yourself that
that love.
>> But I wonder, is that because as an
actor, the next role is probably always
doubtful, right? You have that kind of
industry. Or is it also because you
think the pendulum is
changing back? Like the progress, you
know, what you've described is just like
getting to the promised land of roles
that are nothing to do with your
heritage. You've got there through Sound
of Metal and others, but are there are
there any worries that society or the
industry is rolling back on some of
those things? You know, I do think these
things work in cycles. I think culture
works in cycles, history works in cycles
for better and for worse. You know, I
think we've been through periods where
dominant culture wants to like kind of
like
regressively assert its its um
narratives and we gone through periods
actually of of greater collective kind
of self-confidence when we're able to
let you know, a thousand flowers
blossom.
I think that things never really kind of
like stay in one gear for too long, you
know, for for better and worse. So, I'm
not too concerned about that.
What I am interested in, however, is
something that I do feel is
unprecedented is the democratizing of
the tools of storytelling. It's
fascinating to see how some of the
gatekeeping
is no longer as effective as it was.
Right? Now, we have different kind of
gatekeeping, you know, it's algorithmic
and and and you know,
and seeing consolidation across social
media might undo some of that
democratization,
but actually it's really fascinating to
me to see like how these like kids
picking up their phones can have a
bigger audience than some of these
institutions.
And so
>> a good thing. I think it I think it's
it's
I mean, it's a thing. There are good
things about it. There are things about
it that that maybe are more concerning,
but this is the reality that we're in.
So, I don't know if the pendulum is
swinging back and forth retracing its
old steps. It's it's kind of like
swinging into new territory, I think.
And and that's that's interesting.
Do you remember this book, The Good
Immigrant? It's 10 years old. You wrote
an essay in it called Airports and
Auditions.
>> Right.
It's a very good essay. Thank you.
>> And I looked at it again, and the reason
I wanted to talk to you about it is
because you talk about how
how you grew up. You say, "Since I was a
teenager, I've had to play different
characters negotiating the cultural
expectations of a Pakistani family,
British rude boy culture, and a
scholarship to private school. The
fluidity of my own personal identity on
any given day was further compounded by
the changing labels assigned to Asians
in general.
Did acting
come to you reasonably naturally as an
extension of what you were doing in your
own life? 100% 100% and I look back on
this and I realize it. It's like I was
playing different roles or at least
different versions of myself, right?
Speaking in Urdu wearing shalwar kameez
at home to wearing Reebok Classics and
you know, um
kind of
fake jewelry and you know, out on the
street corner or then school uniform,
you know, wearing a tie that belonged to
Clive House named after Clive of India.
Right? Uh
you know, at school I look back and
actually it was confusing. Actually, I
think it was really enriching, you know?
And for a long time I thought of
code-switching as this kind of like
cross to bear but also kind of
superpower,
you know? That was forced to kind of
explore these different versions of
myself.
I think now my hope for myself, my hope
for
the next generation is they don't have
to code-switch so much and that they
actually they get to
bring all of themselves into
any room they enter. And I think that
desire to change portrayals of ethnic
minorities, I mean it's explicit in this
essay cuz you talk about these various
stages of ethnic minority characters,
the stereotype then the subversive
portrayal challenging the stereotypes
and then what you call the promised
land. In the promised land my name might
even be Dave.
You've got there, right? You've got to
the promised land. You've been in you've
been in Rogue One, one of the Star Wars
films.
What is still elusive?
Um you know, it's interesting. I don't
think of the promised land is
necessarily a kind of
destination. I think it's something we
have to build.
At least I'm realizing that now, you
know. Hence producing, writing.
>> Yeah, I think so.
>> Not so much more, but I mean I guess I
see it all as extensions of
storytelling, you know. I've been
rapping and making music
since I was a teenager and I think of
that as storytelling. I think of
producing and writing scripts as
storytelling. I think of acting as
storytelling. So,
I guess I'm aware that the kind of
promised land I want to see might be
something that me and others have to
build, you know. Um
and and yeah, hence you know,
short films like The Long Goodbye or
Hamlet or or Bait and um
I don't know if that feels elusive. That
feels exciting. That feels like the work
that lies ahead. Yeah. A lot of really
tough subjects you've tackled in your
work. And yet I read the other day that
you said your dream is to be a stand-up
comedian. I don't know if that in itself
was a joke. No, I mean it's interesting
because I like to think that something
like Nightcrawler, which is about the
kind of
the the the insatiable appetite of like
uh violence in news media, it's actually
very funny.
Or Four Lions, which is about um you
know, a hapless group of would-be
suicide bombers. Again, it's very funny.
Um I I would like to think that kind of
humor has been shot through my my work
actually that that seam runs through it
or I don't know. I I kind of like to try
and change lanes and be quite genre
agnostic in that way. It's quite
important to me to have Bait out
alongside Hamlet. You know, I don't like
being pinned down. I I I uh
I want to express all these different
parts of myself.
But you're right, particularly in
America I think where Four Lions maybe
isn't as much of a cultural touchstone.
Yeah, but some people might be surprised
to see me do comedy, but I think people,
particularly in the UK, you know, the
early part of my career, I think they
know that it's a big part of who I am.
So, the mixing different things together
takes me to Saturday Night Live and the
fact that you're part of the UK lineup
of that.
What What does it What does it represent
to you? Was it an immediate yes when
they came to you?
>> Yeah, of course. I think it's a really
cool opportunity to take this kind of
institution
and do it our own way, you know, do it
with British humor. And that feels
exciting to me. I grew up on all these
sketch shows, The Real McCoy, Goodness
Gracious Me, Harry Enfield,
uh The Fast Show. I I stay up late to
watch them. Um
So, I I Yeah, I don't know.
It's kind of
possibly the those sketch shows are
bigger influences on me than any film.
But, they've they've moved into the
past, haven't they? That That particular
kind of show is not really part of
British comedy anymore.
>> Yeah, it's it's an interesting point you
make, you know. I And I kind of think
that
um that's a shame. And so, if it
requires a kind of an American
institution to lend us their brand in
order for us to kind of
revive that tradition here, that's such
a rich tradition, then then I'm all for
it, you know. Sometimes you need a shot
in the arm to kind of remember who you
are, and I think that we we do sketch
comedy pretty well here.
What else are you working on that you
can share? What's What's next in the in
the portfolio?
You know, I did a film recently with Tom
Cruise, directed by Alejandro Iñárritu,
who's who made Birdman and The Revenant,
and is such an incredible, you know,
visionary director. And that experience
was
really unique, and I'm so excited, not
only to for people to see the film, but
to see it myself. I I haven't seen it.
>> it so unique? It was unique because
you've got this combination of actually
obsessive perfectionists in the
director. The director,
You've got one of the all-time greatest
directors, you know, you've got Tom
Cruise, possibly the most notable
um film star you arguably, you know, top
three in the history of cinema.
And so, the level of focus, attention to
detail, and care that they brought to
every single thing.
It floored me. It really floored me. And
particularly Tom, his energy is that of
a just a world class athlete.
His is
is completely inexhaustible reserves of
energy and constantly kind of
quarterbacking it, you know, constantly.
I remember on one of the first days of
rehearsal, I tried something out with
the character that didn't quite work and
said, "Oh, that didn't really work, did
it?" And Alejandro said, "No, no
worries, but we'll keep going." Tom
stopped the rehearsal
to say, "Wiz, when you try things like
that, when you're creating in that way
and taking swings,
I love it. Don't ever stop doing it."
And he gave me a round of applause
for for making a mistake.
And I just thought, this guy's just an
inspirational leader and there's it's no
coincidence that he's in the place he is
in cuz he just cares so much. That was a
real lesson. It was amazing, you know,
it was truly inspiring.
>> said that, you might well have thought,
"Oh, that was just really embarrassing
to try something out. It doesn't work in
front of all these people on set. I'm
never going there again."
>> Exactly. But actually being given
permission to fail, to be messy, to try
things is is so crucial, not just for an
actor in rehearsal, but for an executive
at a company or anything, you know.
Speaking of being inexhaustible, I feel
that's got to be the case with you as
well, right? Look at the number of
things that you're working on. And I'm
sure as an actor, you're always grateful
for the for the work, but
this podcast is part of Bloomberg
Weekend. So, I have to ask you what
yours are like, you know, husband,
parent as well. What are those days of
the week like?
>> My weekends are the highlight of my week
and they're very simple.
They're just very simple. They're about
having breakfast together. It's about
going for a walk. My kid loves going to
the fishmongers, just as I did weirdly.
I used to love going there with my mom
and just looking at the fish, just
touching the fish and talking
You know, he's obsessed with that. You
know, just these simple kind of things,
these simple rituals, traditions.
It's just so grounding and it's, you
know, it's it's what life's about. So, I
keep it extremely boring and very simple
and quite slow. Um and I try and visit
my my parents most weekends, if not
every weekend. It's very boring and
extremely satisfying. But I imagine
quite hard to protect that kind of time.
>> It can be when you're filming in
particular, cuz often there's things to
>> there are rewrites, are you always
thinking about the next project or
there's a script you need to read or
like to actually force yourself to
>> it's it's it's challenging and I think
that's something that
most people can relate to now, right?
The working week seems to like be 7 days
at this point and disengaging from
emails is like such a discipline, takes
such force of will.
I think something that I'm
kind of rediscovering is the importance
of boredom.
You know, that actually the adrenal rush
of being constantly active
is an addiction.
It's an addiction like any other.
And trying to find of like find ways of
just downshifting my nervous system to
appreciate stillness. It it's it takes
effort. It takes effort and and and I
and I what I'm discovering is like the
bigger boundary to keep is internal
rather than external. That actually if I
tell people, "Hey,
don't contact me here." They usually
won't. But there's a part of me that
wants them to. There's a part of me that
wants to keep riding the wave of
activity. And so, I think that's just
that's a learning curve that I'm on. But
that space, is that also where ideas
come from? That you actually need to try
and
>> There's a reason why the best ideas come
in the shower or the toilet seat.
As you know, not the toilet seat anymore
cuz we all take our phones to the
toilet, but in the shower is the last
sanctuary of of our imagination, isn't
it? Um you don't have your phone on you,
and you're just doing something
automatic. And I feel driving around in
a car as well to be like where I have
those eureka moments.
Um doing the dishes, all these kinds of
things, right? You do the dishes?
I definitely cuz my wife does not. I am
I am the neat freak. Uh so, yeah, that's
my
uh I
I'm very OCD about those kind of things.
Finally, Riz, I do want to ask you about
fame because you have got fame now. When
you go to the park with your kid, I'm
sure there are times you're spotted and
asked for a selfie. How do you deal with
that side of life?
You know,
I I think that
the the level of re- kind of recognition
I have is is
I'm very grateful for it. It's
you know, couple of times a day someone
will say something nice or nod or say a
pleasant word, you know. Usually when
you're with family,
people are understanding. If they want a
picture, I'll just say, you know, I'm
with family right now and move on. It's
just kind of like
uh
an intermittent kind of nudge of
positivity through your day.
Um
I think I think the the bigger issue
isn't kind of other people. I think it's
internal.
Actually, it's it's kind of
it can make you a bit guarded.
You know, I used to just love engaging
strangers in
prolonged conversations. Just I just
love I'm just quite chatty. Very
un-British way to be. Well, I don't
know, actually, you know. Particularly,
I mean, if if you go up north, for
example, I don't know. Like it's it's
about chatting to the shopkeeper,
chatting to someone at the bus stop. I
just love that.
And I think I've stopped doing that as
much
because part of me wasn't sure if these
people are engaging with me because
they're having a pleasant chat with a
random
or because they recognize me or
something and there's something ulterior
going on and and I think it's made me a
bit more guarded. Uh
I think the problem is more my own trust
rather than other people's behavior,
which is interesting. And for someone
who lives their life telling stories,
are you storytelling to your
your child now?
>> Yeah, my child loves stories and and
you know,
we both of us are storytellers, so um
Yeah, your wife's a novelist. Exactly,
so uh And in the writer's room as we
learned.
>> E- exactly, yeah. So, no, it's it's
I just you kind of like those are the
things you hold on to, right? I just
remember the stories that my dad would
tell me growing up that have still stuck
with me and um I I do think the story is
something kind of magical and spiritual
and it's the
most profound, powerful technology we've
ever created as humans, so um
I don't know, I kind of feel like
stories are where we find ourselves and
how we recognize our similarities with
characters who seemingly are nothing
like us and
um
yeah, I'm a I'm a I'm kind of an
evangelical about the power and
importance of story at the heart of our
culture. Riz Ahmed, thank you so much.
Thank you.